Process to handle security reports (#56)
expressjs/security-wg: docs/handle_security_reports.md

**Responsibilities**
- Acknowledge receipt of security reports within the required timeframe.
- Assign an Analyst to assess and validate the report.
- Ensure communication with the reporter throughout the process.
- Coordinate the remediation process if a vulnerability is confirmed.
- Oversee the advisory & CVE request process if applicable.
- Escalate critical vulnerabilities when necessary.
- Track all security reports for visibility and reporting.

**Requirements**
- Must be a member of the Security Triage Team.

### Security Analyst

**Responsibilities**
- Validating proof-of-concept exploits
- Assess the security report and determine its severity (assist in CVSS).
- Validate the reported vulnerability against best practices.
- Identify potential mitigation strategies.
- Prepare a report for the Security Report Coordinator.

### Remediation Developer

**Responsibilities**
- Develop a patch or solution based on the reported vulnerability.
- Ensure the patch follows best practices and is testable.
- Test the patch to ensure it works as expected.

> - Create a pull request to merge the patch into the project.

Reviewer: Here should be the mention of the private fork, right? When it hasn't been disclosed publicly.

Author: Not sure if we want to mention it here as we will always work on the patches in a private fork.

1.2.1 In the case of a report made public in a Pull request or issue under the Express organizations ownership the following process will be followed (by a Express TC member - due permissions level):

    * Move the issue to the private repository called [expressjs/security-triage](https://github.com/expressjs/security-triage).
    * For any related pull requests, create an associated issue in [expressjs/security-triage](https://github.com/expressjs/security-triage) repository.  Add a copy of the patch for the pull request to the issue. Add screenshots of discussion from the pull request to the issue.
    * [Open a ticket with GitHub](https://support.github.com/contact) to delete the pull request using Expressjs (team) as the account organization.
    * Open a new issue in the public repository with the title `FYI - pull request deleted #YYYY`. Include an explanation for the user:
        > FYI @xxxx we asked GitHub to delete your pull request while we work on releases in private.

>     * Update the the team in the slack channel #express-security-triage`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Update the team in the slack channel #express-security-triage`.
```

2.3 If the report is considered relevant and valid, the Security Report Coordinator (SRC) will create an advisory and request a CVE number. The Security Report Coordinator (SRC) will also include the remediation developer(s), analyst(s) and potentially the reporter in the advisory, so they can start to work on private fork to fix the security issue (example: [GHSA-qw6h-vgh9-j6wx](https://github.com/expressjs/express/security/advisories/GHSA-qw6h-vgh9-j6wx)).

### Step 3: Patch and release

3.1 The security triage team will determine if this vulnerability will be patched and work on it. In case that the vulnerability won't be patched jump to step 4.
3.2 The mitigation team (remediation developer(s), analyst(s), reporter(s)) will work on the patch(es), re-evaluate the report once the patch is ready and include regression tests (when possible).
3.3 The Express TC will announce publicly (social media and public issues) that there is security path available and the plan to do a release with an specific date (ideally) and the versions affected without providing additional information to prevent early disclosure.

> 3.4 The security triage, repo captain(s) and TC team will create the releases and publish them to npm. In some cases one vulnerability can affect multiple packages requiring several coordinated releases.

Reviewer: Because the security triage won't always have the permissions to do the release; only the captains and the TC can do it, as I understand.
```suggestion
3.4 The security triage, along with the repo captain(s) and the TC team, will create the releases and publish them to npm. In some cases one vulnerability can affect multiple packages requiring several coordinated releases.
```

# Security Report Handling Process
**Version:** 1.0  
**Last Updated:** March 2025  
**Maintainers:** Security Triage Team  

## Introduction
Security is a top priority for the Express.js project. This document outlines the **formal process** for handling **security reports**, including how to **triage**, **assess**, and **disclose** vulnerabilities responsibly.

## Scope

The Security Triage Team will use this document as a process guide when a security vulnerability is reported, from triage to resolution. This process must align with the project's [SECURITY policy](https://github.com/expressjs/.github/blob/master/SECURITY.md) and cannot diverge significantly.

## Security Report Handling Flowchart
The following diagram details the **decision-making process** for handling security reports:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Security Report Received] --> B[Assign Security Report Coordinator]
    B --> E{Premature Disclosure?}
    
    E -- No --> J[Proceed with Standard Private Process]

>     E -- Yes --> F[Privatize Disclosure]

Reviewer 2: this step my not always be possibe (ex. depends on github deleting things, details might also be outside of GH). for a runbook it should be clear when this step needs to be skipped to prevent a deadlock.

Author: I made some clarifications about this on https://github.com/expressjs/security-wg/blob/ulises/security-process/docs/handle_security_reports.md?plain=1#L134 just to keep a "lean" approach in the graph, but very open to code suggestions :)

    F --> G[Handle Related PRs & Issues]
    G --> H[Request GitHub to Remove Public PR/Issues]
    H --> I[Create Public Placeholder Issue]

>     I --> J[Acknowledge within 5 days to the Reporter]

Reviewer 3: I don't see this ack or 5 day time frame mentioned in the sections below for the steps. I think it needs to be either in both, or in the detailed text form and referenced from the mermaid diagram. I was reading the steps, and thinking "wait, I dont see us ack'ing the submission".

Reviewer 3: Ah, re-reading again and I see it is here: https://github.com/expressjs/security-wg/pull/56/files#diff-e6c76e85b62187db4232abf6ad2299fea45f03b96798e0a40b2510cf8854fbbdR80

That said, I would not be surprised if the "steps" get used more like a "checklist" for us, so I still think it would be good to include in the steps.

    J --> K[Create Issue in Triage Repo for Visibility]

>     K --> L[Assess Report]

Reviewer 2: I would add basic [criticality / impact assesment](https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/criticality) metrics here and also estimate severity / CVSS to understand if this is likely a low / low or crit / crit. Not every vulnerability is equally important but maybe for every hundred reports one really has urgency.

Author: Agree, but it is not required probably to do a proper CVSS Scoring for the Security Report Coordinator (SRC). The team will do the evaluation and determine severity and following steps ([ref](https://github.com/expressjs/security-wg/blob/054ab8a04a129f45fed98000cc8e93db7d51b1ed/docs/handle_security_reports.md?plain=1#L144)). We manage a lot of packages so it is hard for all of us to determine severity for each of them due lack of familiarity.

    L --> M{Enough Information?}
    
    M -- No --> N[Request Additional Info]
    N --> L[Assess Report]
    
    M -- Yes --> O{Valid Vulnerability?}
    O -- No --> X[Close Report as Invalid]
    X --> Y[Acknowledge within 10 days to the Reporter]
    
    O -- Yes --> Q[Create Advisory]

>     Q --> Q1[Calculate CVSS Score]

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this happen earler / asap to help with `L --> M{Enough Information?}` step and also to priotize the vulnerability better?

Author: Well, based on our recent experience with the reporters not really as most of the time we need to loop back to get more accurate info or poc, etc... to properly understand what and if is a vulnerability.

    Q1 --> Q2[Request a CVE]

    Q2 --> R{Patch Required?}
    
    R -- No --> Z[Public Disclosure]
    
    R -- Yes --> T[Develop Patch]
    T --> U[Test Solution]

>     U --> V[Add Regression Testing]

Author: It is included here but maybe we need to make it more explicit https://github.com/expressjs/security-wg/blob/ulises/security-process/docs/handle_security_reports.md?plain=1#L154

    V --> W[Create a Security Release with CVE Included]
    W --> Z[Public Disclosure]

>     Z --> Z1[Notify Community]

Reviewer: Private disclosure to whom? To maintainers who depend on the package? To the consumers of the package? Or is it a prior announcement, for example via the blog or social media, that a security patch will be released soon?

>     Z --> Z1[Notify Community]

Author: > I think it might make sense to add a private disclosure step here, which can maybe be skipped.

How the private disclosure will work?

> "Notify Community" is one of the hardest parts and more steps are required, along the lines of ISO/IEC 29147.

So far this is the process that we follow: https://github.com/expressjs/security-wg/blob/ulises/security-process/docs/handle_security_reports.md?plain=1#L161. Probably we won't follow the ISO if need to pay to read it :thinking:

    Z1 --> Z2[Official Blog Post]
    Z1 --> Z3[Social Media Announcements]
```

## Roles & Responsibilities

> 

Reviewer 4: suggest adding a role for `Finder`, which is often, but not always, the same person as the reporter

Author: Included in 8c09fbb

### Reporter

> This person submits a security report to the Security Triage Team and provides detailed information about the suspected vulnerability. It is expected that the reporter will cooperate with the Security Triage Team during this process and follows responsible disclosure guidelines.

Reviewer 5: I'd include a link to the existing way a reporter reports a vulnerability. I suspect Express is using email, right? So, I'd just mention it (again).

Reviewer 3: Yes, we have an email but it is getting a lot of spam. We may need to consider some options like changing the email every once in a while to reduce spam or something, otherwise it feels like it will be overwhelming to the project. That said, I agree we should either mention it here or link to where we document it.

Author: We are migrating already to GH advisory, see: https://github.com/expressjs/.github/pull/16

**Responsibilities**
- Submit a security report to the Security Triage Team.

**Expectations**

> - Provide detailed information about the suspected vulnerability.

Reviewer 5: Do we have a issue template?

Author: Not yet! But soon in a separate PR for sure. I will include it in my TODO

- Follow responsible disclosure guidelines (report privately before public disclosure).
- Cooperate with the security team by providing additional details when needed.
- Test and verify patches (when applicable).
- Respect security timelines and avoid premature public disclosure.

> ### Security Report Coordinator (SRC)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Coordinator
```

> This person acts the focal point for an specific security report and ensures the report follows all responsible disclosure guidelines, also coordinates the remediation process if a vulnerability is confirmed. The SRC ensures that the security report follows the process and coordinates necessary actions, but does not perform analysis, remediation, or patching themselves.

Reviewer 4: coordinators are often involved in analysis, remediation, and review. I don't see why we would need to codify a restriction on those activities

Author: The idea was to clarify that the coordinator is not necessarily responsible for performing the patch or conducting the analysis. However, this does not mean the coordinator can't also be the remediation developer or the analyst. In other words, one person can hold multiple roles :thinking:

Author: I did a bit of rewording in 38b6532, that I hope solved it  :+1:

**Responsibilities**
- Acknowledge receipt of security reports within the required timeframe.

> - Assign an Analyst to assess and validate the report.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Orchestrate the embargo and identify the minimum set of individuals involved.
  - Remind everyone involved that no further individuals should be notified or brought in. If someone else needs to be involved, that must go through the Coordinator.
- Assign an Analyst to assess and validate the report.
```

- Ensure communication with the reporter throughout the process.

> - Coordinate the remediation process if a vulnerability is confirmed.

Reviewer 3: You mention assigning an Analyst, are we specifically not "assigning a remediation developer" here for a reason?

Reviewer 4: yes, of all the roles need to be assigned (though the act of "assigning" in reality doesn't need to be so formal)

each issue would need an analyst at minimum, and if it was determined to be a vuln, then remediation developer(s) and reviewer(s) will be needed

- Oversee the advisory & CVE request process if applicable.
- Escalate critical vulnerabilities when necessary.
- Track all security reports for visibility and reporting.

**Requirements**
- Must be a member of the Security Triage Team.

> ### Security Analyst

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Analyst
```

**Responsibilities**

> - Validating proof-of-concept exploits

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Determine if the reported issue is a real vulnerability, and is in within the scope of our [threat model](https://github.com/expressjs/security-wg/blob/main/docs/ThreatModel.md)
- Validate proof-of-concept exploits
```

Author: Great improvement!!

- Assess the security report and determine its severity (assist in CVSS).
- Validate the reported vulnerability against best practices.

> - Identify potential mitigation strategies.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Identify potential mitigation strategies and workarounds.
```

> - Prepare a report for the Security Report Coordinator.

Reviewer 4: what is this report?

Author: well maybe report is not the best world, the idea is to ensure that is "sharing the findings" with the coordinator :thinking:

### Remediation Developer

**Responsibilities**
- Develop a patch or solution based on the reported vulnerability.

> - Ensure the patch follows best practices and is testable.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Ensure the patch follows best practices and is testable.
- Add test(s) to the existing test suite to confirm the vulnerability (pre-patch) and confirm the fix (post-patch).
```

- Test the patch to ensure it works as expected.
- Create a pull request to merge the patch into the project.

## Runbook

The following sections outline the **step-by-step process**, explaining each decision, scenario, and possible actions. In this guide we also include links that are private (limited to the security triage team), a general overview of the process in flowchart format can be found [here](#security-report-handling-flowchart).

### Step 0: Security Report Received

A security vulnerability report is received via [official channels](https://github.com/expressjs/.github/blob/master/SECURITY.md#reporting-a-bug) or otherwise (i.e. via third-party advisory services, blog post, social media, etc.).

> Ideally, the report must contain **clear and detailed information** like (Affected versions, steps to reproduce, expected vs. actual behavior, potential impact...) but this might not be the case depending on the communication channel used. Later on we will try to collect this information and refine the report.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Ideally, the report must contain **clear and detailed information** like (Affected versions, a small PoC/sample project demonstrating the issue, steps to reproduce, expected vs. actual behavior, potential impact...) but this might not be the case depending on the communication channel used. Later on we will try to collect this information and refine the report.
```

### Step 1: Assign Security Report Coordinator (SRC) and consolidate the report

> 1.1 One person from the Security Triage Team will volunteer and self-assign to oversee the case. It is expected that the person will remain assigned until the end of the process, so they effectively take the rol of [the Security Report Coordinator (SRC)](#security-report-coordinator-src).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1.1 One person from the Security Triage Team will volunteer and self-assign to oversee the case. It is expected that the person will remain assigned until the end of the process, so they effectively take the role of [the Security Report Coordinator (SRC)](#security-report-coordinator-src).
```

> 1.1 One person from the Security Triage Team will volunteer and self-assign to oversee the case. It is expected that the person will remain assigned until the end of the process, so they effectively take the rol of [the Security Report Coordinator (SRC)](#security-report-coordinator-src).

Reviewer 4: This need not be limited to one person, but I'm fine with leaving this doc referring to that, just for simplicity.  In practice, having two coordinators is acceptable, and often better than just one.  Also, someone needs to be reviewing the actual advisory content before it goes out, and this role is best addressed by a second coordinator.

Author: I included a note to reflect this in 2544711 :+1:

> 1.2 If the report was created accidentally or intentionally in a public channel (e.g. GitHub issues), it is important to share this information asap in the private slack channel `#express-security-triage` so the Security triage team is aware of it. At this stage, our priority is to remove the report from public view as soon as possible and let the reporter know what happened next.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1.2 If the report was created accidentally or intentionally in a public channel (e.g. GitHub issues), it is important to share this information ASAP in the private slack channel `#express-security-triage` so the Security triage team is aware of it. At this stage, our priority is to remove the report from public view as soon as possible and let the reporter know what happened next.
```

> 1.2.1 In the case of a report made public in a Pull request or issue under the Express organizations ownership the following process will be followed (by a Express TC member - due permissions level):

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1.2.1 In the case of a report made public in a Pull request or issue under the Express organizations ownership the following process will be followed (by an Express TC member):
```

    * Move the issue to the private repository called [expressjs/security-triage](https://github.com/expressjs/security-triage).
    * For any related pull requests, create an associated issue in [expressjs/security-triage](https://github.com/expressjs/security-triage) repository.  Add a copy of the patch for the pull request to the issue. Add screenshots of discussion from the pull request to the issue.

>     * [Open a ticket with GitHub](https://support.github.com/contact) to delete the pull request using Expressjs (team) as the account organization.

Reviewer 4: we should add an item here to force-push overwriting the PR code.  generally people leave the checkbox "allow edits by maintainers" checked by default, so this will usually be doable

in a PR comment, we can also note to the PR author that we did this and why

Author: Great point! Added in 0241b7c

    * Open a new issue in the public repository with the title `FYI - pull request deleted #YYYY`. Include an explanation for the user:
        > FYI @xxxx we asked GitHub to delete your pull request while we work on releases in private.
    * Update the team in the slack channel #express-security-triage`.

> 1.2.2 In the case that the report is made public in a different channel that we don't own/control is expected from the TC to find ways (when possible) to mitigate this by treying to remove the report from public view (reporting to support, asking the reporter to remove the report, etc...).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1.2.2 In the case that the report is made public in a different channel that we don't own/control, the TC will attempt to mitigate this by trying to remove the report from public view (reporting to support, asking the reporter to remove the report, etc...).
```

> [!Note]
> It is expected that the issue will be assigned to the Security Report Coordinator (SRC) and will remain open until the end of the process.

### Step 2: Review the Report and determine its severity

2.1 It is expected from the security triage team to review the report and determine its severity, also evaluating the impact on the project(s). In some cases the report might be too vague to properly determine its severity. In this case the Security Report Coordinator (SRC) will need to reach out to the reporter for more information and refine the report.

2.2 At this stage we are capable of determining the severity of the report based on the information provided and also if the report is still relevant. In case that the team has considered the report to be irrelevant or not valid, the Security Report Coordinator (SRC) will need to close the issue and inform the reporter that the report has been dismissed, ideally we can provide a reason for dismissal to prevent the report from being resubmitted within the project(s) in the future.

> 2.3 If the report is considered relevant and valid, the Security Report Coordinator (SRC) will create an advisory and request a CVE number. The Security Report Coordinator (SRC) will also include the remediation developer(s), analyst(s) and potentially the reporter in the advisory, so they can start to work on private fork to fix the security issue (example: [GHSA-qw6h-vgh9-j6wx](https://github.com/expressjs/express/security/advisories/GHSA-qw6h-vgh9-j6wx)).

Reviewer 3: How to do this stuff in detail is exactly what I hope we can get training for the team on via the STF funding. @ctcpip has been incredibly helpful with this but having a more cross training and depth here will help keep it sustainable. I wonder if the GH training also intends to cover this, @sheplu have you gotten an update on that?

Author: Yep! All of this will be done in a proper training. Also take in account that our plan is to use the Foundation CNA (in progress) so we can ask for support when a CVE is not clear.

Note: The CNA change will be included in separate document as the new CNA is not officially ready.

# Security Report Handling Process
**Version:** 1.0  
**Last Updated:** March 2025  
**Maintainers:** Security Triage Team  

## Introduction
Security is a top priority for the Express.js project. This document outlines the **formal process** for handling **security reports**, including how to **triage**, **assess**, and **disclose** vulnerabilities responsibly.

## Scope

The Security Triage Team will use this document as a process guide when a security vulnerability is reported, from triage to resolution. This process must align with the project's [SECURITY policy](https://github.com/expressjs/.github/blob/master/SECURITY.md) and cannot diverge significantly.

## Security Report Handling Flowchart
The following diagram details the **decision-making process** for handling security reports:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Security Report Received] --> B[Assign Security Report Coordinator]
    B --> E{Premature Disclosure?}
    
    E -- No --> J[Proceed with Standard Private Process]
    E -- Yes --> F[Privatize Disclosure]
    F --> G[Handle Related PRs & Issues]
    G --> H[Request GitHub to Remove Public PR/Issues]

>     H --> I[Create Public Placeholder Issue]

Reviewer: what is public placeholder issue?

Author: The problem here is that if we **delete** an issue or PR, the creator won’t receive a response, and sometimes it’s impossible to contact them directly (e.g., if they don’t have a public email on their GitHub profile). 

To address this, the idea is to create a new issue and mention the original reporter. This ensures they are aware of the situation and helps **prevent** them from re-publishing it, thinking the original was removed without explanation.

_Note: This has already happened to us. 😓_

For more details on this **placeholder approach**, see the Node.js documentation:  
[Reference](https://github.com/nodejs/node/blob/d3064e8ddbe3fefc6ece838d8d298d78616162ae/doc/contributing/collaborator-guide.md?plain=1#L106)

> Open a new issue in the public repository with the title `FYI - pull request
>  deleted #YYYY`. Include an explanation for the user:
>  > FYI `@xxx` we asked GitHub to delete your pull request while we work on
>  > releases in private.

Reviewer: Ohh, interesting. 

That was the only part I didn't understand what it meant.
